docs/data-sources.md, before:

# Data Sources

This note summarises every dataset currently (or soon to be) used by CirQuant and explains how each maps onto the raw DuckDB schema documented in `docs/database-schema-raw.md`. Use it to check provenance, coverage, and limitations before running large fetch jobs or interpreting results.

## 1. Source inventory

| Source | Role | Raw table pattern | Time span | Notes |
|--------|------|------------------|-----------|-------|
| **PRODCOM** (Eurostat) | Production and limited trade indicators by PRODCOM code | `prodcom_ds_059358_YYYY`, `prodcom_ds_059359_YYYY` | 1995–present | DS-059358 (sold production/trade) fetched by default; DS-059359 (total production) optional |
| **COMEXT** (Eurostat) | Trade flows by HS6 code (imports/exports, intra/extra EU) | `comext_ds_059341_YYYY` | 2002–present | Primary source for trade data |
| **Waste statistics** (Eurostat) | Treatment and collection for WEEE/batteries | `env_wastrt_YYYY`, `env_waseleeos_YYYY`, `env_waspb_YYYY` | Various | Waste treatment (env_wastrt), WEEE open scope (env_waseleeos), portable batteries (env_waspb) |
| **Waste treatment / material recovery** | Recovery efficiencies by material | `env_wastrt_YYYY` | Various | Provides recovery percentages |
| **Material composition datasets** | Product bill-of-materials | `<dataset>_YYYY` (to be defined) | TBD | Under assessment (Ecodesign studies, PEF, LCA) |
| **Derived weights** | Mass & counts per product | `product_weights_YYYY` (processed DB) | Derived annually | Combines config weights with PRODCOM counts and COMEXT mass |

Only PRODCOM and COMEXT populate the raw DuckDB today; other sources will follow the same naming convention once integrated.

## 2. PRODCOM (Production statistics)

### 2.1 Datasets

- **DS-059358** – Annual PRODCOM data by PRODCOM_LIST (NACE Rev. 2). Provides sold production plus export/import indicators for each declarant country and EU aggregates (time range 1995–2023 in the current database snapshot).
- **DS-059359** – Total production dataset. Useful when sold production figures diverge from total output; not fetched by default because it often returns empty responses due to confidentiality. Request explicitly via the `custom_datasets` argument.

### 2.2 Raw schema alignment

Both datasets are written to tables named `prodcom_ds_<dataset>_<year>` exactly as described in `docs/database-schema-raw.md`. Key columns include:
- `prccode` / `prodcom_code_original` – PRODCOM code without/with dots.
- `indicators` / `indicators_label` – Indicator codes such as `PRODVAL`, `PRODQNT`, `EXPVAL`, `EXPQNT`, `IMPVAL`, `IMPQNT`, `QNTUNIT`.
- `decl` / `decl_label` – Declarant country code and label.
- `value` – Stored as VARCHAR to handle numbers, units, and flags (e.g., `:c` for confidential).
- Metadata timestamps (`update_data`, `timestamp_data`, etc.) for traceability.

Indicator definitions:
- `PRODVAL` – Production value (EUR)
- `PRODQNT` – Production quantity (units vary; see `QNTUNIT`)
- `EXPVAL`, `EXPQNT` – Export value/quantity (DS-059358)
- `IMPVAL`, `IMPQNT` – Import value/quantity (DS-059358)
- `QNTUNIT` – Unit label (KG, L, M3, etc.)
- Total production indicators – Reported in DS-059359; available fields mirror Eurostat’s total production outputs for the requested year.

### 2.3 Usage notes

- PRODCOM trade indicators act as a fallback only when COMEXT has zeros for a product-year combination.
- Confidentiality frequently suppresses `PRODQNT` at EU aggregates; the system logs empty responses but continues processing.
- When fetching DS-059359 for total production:
  ```julia
  fetch_prodcom_data("2017-2023", ["ds-059359"])  # Only total production dataset
  fetch_prodcom_data("2017-2023", ["ds-059358", "ds-059359"])  # Fetch both
  ```
- Fetching options:
  - Parallel per-year fetch is available via `parallel_years=true` and `max_parallel_years` (defaults to 2). A shared rate limiter (`rate_limit_seconds`, `rate_limit_jitter`) is applied across workers to avoid API bursts.
  - The shell wrapper `fetch_data.sh` exposes these as env vars (e.g., `PARALLEL_YEARS=true MAX_PARALLEL_YEARS=2 RATE_LIMIT_SECONDS=0.6`).
  - For a fast development snapshot, `fetch_test_data.sh "2022-2023" "heat_pumps,pv_panels"` writes to `CirQuant-database/raw/test.duckdb`; adjust `DB_PATH` to target another test database. Defaults use a slightly lower rate limit for quicker iterations.
  - Limit scope with `product_keys_filter` (e.g., `["heat_pumps","pv_panels"]`) when calling `fetch_prodcom_data` to keep test downloads small and focused.

## 3. COMEXT (Trade statistics)

### 3.1 Dataset

- **DS-059341** – International trade for EU and partner countries since 2002, disaggregated by HS2/HS4/HS6 products. CirQuant requests HS6 records matching the product mapping table, filtered by partner grouping and flow type.

### 3.2 Raw schema alignment

Rows are stored in `comext_ds_059341_YYYY`. Important columns (see `docs/database-schema-raw.md` for the full list):
- `product` – HS6 code without dots; `hs_code_query` retains the queried string.
- `flow` / `flow_code` – `1` for imports, `2` for exports (with `flow_label` text).
- `partner` / `partner_code` / `partner_label` – e.g., `INT_EU27_2020` (intra-EU) or `EXT_EU27_2020` (extra-EU).
- `indicators` – `VALUE_EUR` or `QUANTITY_KG`.
- `value` – Stored as VARCHAR because Eurostat may return scientific notation or placeholders.
- `fetch_date` – Timestamp when the call was executed.

### 3.3 Query strategy

To manage rate limits and file sizes:
1. **Partner split** – Separate calls for `INT_EU27_2020` and `EXT_EU27_2020`.
2. **Flow split** – Imports (`flow=1`) and exports (`flow=2`).
3. **Product filtering** – Only HS6 codes defined in `config/products.toml`.
4. **Rate limiting** – 0.5s delay after successful calls, 1s after failures.
5. **Error handling** – Failures are logged; fetch routines continue so a single outage does not halt the workflow.

COMEXT is treated as the authoritative source for trade indicators; PRODCOM fallback logic only replaces zero values to avoid double counting.

## 4. Complementary circular-economy data (planned)

The following datasets extend the analysis but have not yet been loaded into the raw DuckDB. When implemented, they will follow the same naming pattern (`<dataset>_<year>`).

### 4.1 Waste collection statistics

- **`env_waselee`** – WEEE data for electronic equipment.
- **`env_wasbat`** – Battery waste statistics.
- **Content** – Annual collection or recycling rates by product category and country.
- **Use** – Provides `current_circularity_rate` values grounded in official statistics, replacing placeholder assumptions in the configuration.

### 4.2 Waste treatment / recovery efficiency

- **`env_wastrt`** – Waste treatment operations by material.
- **Content** – Recovery rates for materials such as steel, aluminium, copper, plastics.
- **Use** – Supplies material-specific recycling efficiencies for calculating recovered tonnes/euros in the processed database.

### 4.3 Material composition datasets

- **Sources under review** – Ecodesign preparatory studies, Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) datasets, commercial LCA databases.
- **Content** – Product × material × mass share, potentially with year or technology differentiators.
- **Use** – Enables weighted material recovery calculations in PRQL transformations.

### 4.4 Derived weights and mass/count synthesis

- **Method** – Build `product_weights_YYYY` in the processed database by merging:
  - Config `weight_kg` per product (from `config/products.toml`)
  - PRODCOM counts (`QNTUNIT` = pieces) to derive total mass (`count × weight`)
  - COMEXT mass (`QUANTITY_KG`) to derive counts (`mass / weight`)
  - If both are present, keep both and mark the source as `combined`; otherwise `prodcom_counts_config_mass`, `comext_mass_config_counts`, or `config`.
- **Status** – Persisted in processed DuckDB after transformation; used to supply total mass or unit counts when one of the two is missing in raw sources.

## 5. Product scope and mappings

CirQuant currently focuses on:
- Heat pumps & refrigeration equipment
- Photovoltaic equipment
- ICT hardware (phones, computers, monitors, storage, aggregate ICT categories)
- Batteries (Li-ion and other chemistries)

Each product entry in `config/products.toml` lists PRODCOM and HS codes which feed the fetch routines. The mapping table constructed from this configuration ensures that PRODCOM (`prccode`) and HS (`product`) codes can be reconciled during transformation.

## 6. Fetching and processing strategy

### 6.1 Trade data priority
- **Primary** – COMEXT (`VALUE_EUR`, `QUANTITY_KG`) for imports/exports.
- **Fallback** – PRODCOM indicators only when COMEXT delivers `0` or missing values for the same product-year. Replacement happens during the harmonisation phase when building `production_trade_harmonized_YYYY` and `production_trade_YYYY`.

### 6.2 Performance safeguards
- **Rate limiting** – 0.5 s delay after success, 1 s after failure (both APIs).
- **Query batching** – PRODCOM: one call per indicator-year-product; COMEXT: one call per HS6-year-flow-partner set.
- **Error logging** – Failures are recorded; processing continues with partial data if necessary.
- **Fallback storage** – If DuckDB writes fail, CSV backups are generated so no fetch is lost.

### 6.3 Handling non-default datasets
Use the `custom_datasets` argument when calling `fetch_prodcom_data` to include DS-059359 or other PRODCOM datasets. This keeps the default workflow lightweight while still supporting targeted research.

## 7. Known issues and coverage gaps

1. **Confidentiality** – DS-059359 and certain PRODCOM indicators return empty results for EU aggregates or small countries. Expect gaps and rely on COMEXT/other sources when possible.
2. **Trade gaps** – Some HS codes lack trade entries in early years or for specific partner combinations. Logged as empty results; analysts may need to cross-check or adjust mapping codes.
3. **Unit heterogeneity** – `QNTUNIT` varies widely; downstream conversion scripts must handle litres, pieces, square metres, etc.
4. **Historical limits** – PRODCOM extends to 1995, but COMEXT starts in 2002, constraining the overlap period available for joint analyses.

## 8. Database storage recap

The raw DuckDB mirrors Eurostat responses (see `docs/database-schema-raw.md`). Table names and columns match those described above, ensuring:
- **Traceability** – metadata columns (`fetch_date`, timestamps, original codes) track every API call.
- **Consistency** – one table per dataset-year combination.
- **Extensibility** – future sources (waste statistics, material composition) will adopt the same naming convention so documentation remains valid.

Processed tables (e.g., `product_material_composition_YYYY`, `material_recycling_rates_YYYY`, `product_collection_rates_YYYY`, `product_weights_YYYY`, `product_unit_values_YYYY`, `circularity_indicators_by_strategy_YYYY`) build on these inputs and are described in `docs/database-schema-processed.md`.

Commit message:

Normalize UMP WEEE import and integrate with fetch pipeline

docs/data-sources.md, after:

# Data Sources

This note summarises every dataset currently (or soon to be) used by CirQuant and explains how each maps onto the raw DuckDB schema documented in `docs/database-schema-raw.md`. Use it to check provenance, coverage, and limitations before running large fetch jobs or interpreting results.

## 1. Source inventory

| Source | Role | Raw table pattern | Time span | Notes |
|--------|------|------------------|-----------|-------|
| **PRODCOM** (Eurostat) | Production and limited trade indicators by PRODCOM code | `prodcom_ds_059358_YYYY`, `prodcom_ds_059359_YYYY` | 1995–present | DS-059358 (sold production/trade) fetched by default; DS-059359 (total production) optional |
| **COMEXT** (Eurostat) | Trade flows by HS6 code (imports/exports, intra/extra EU) | `comext_ds_059341_YYYY` | 2002–present | Primary source for trade data |
| **Waste statistics** (Eurostat) | Treatment and collection for WEEE/batteries | `env_wastrt_YYYY`, `env_waseleeos_YYYY`, `env_waspb_YYYY` | Various | Waste treatment (env_wastrt), WEEE open scope (env_waseleeos), portable batteries (env_waspb) |
| **Urban Mine Platform (UMP)** | WEEE stocks/flows download (Excel package) | `ump_weee_history` | Varies by release | Normalized historical rows by country × year × category; download URL configurable if portal changes |
| **Waste treatment / material recovery** | Recovery efficiencies by material | `env_wastrt_YYYY` | Various | Provides recovery percentages |
| **Material composition datasets** | Product bill-of-materials | `<dataset>_YYYY` (to be defined) | TBD | Under assessment (Ecodesign studies, PEF, LCA) |
| **Derived weights** | Mass & counts per product | `product_weights_YYYY` (processed DB) | Derived annually | Combines config weights with PRODCOM counts and COMEXT mass |

Only PRODCOM and COMEXT populate the raw DuckDB today; other sources will follow the same naming convention once integrated.

## 2. PRODCOM (Production statistics)

### 2.1 Datasets

- **DS-059358** – Annual PRODCOM data by PRODCOM_LIST (NACE Rev. 2). Provides sold production plus export/import indicators for each declarant country and EU aggregates (time range 1995–2023 in the current database snapshot).
- **DS-059359** – Total production dataset. Useful when sold production figures diverge from total output; not fetched by default because it often returns empty responses due to confidentiality. Request explicitly via the `custom_datasets` argument.

### 2.2 Raw schema alignment

Both datasets are written to tables named `prodcom_ds_<dataset>_<year>` exactly as described in `docs/database-schema-raw.md`. Key columns include:
- `prccode` / `prodcom_code_original` – PRODCOM code without/with dots.
- `indicators` / `indicators_label` – Indicator codes such as `PRODVAL`, `PRODQNT`, `EXPVAL`, `EXPQNT`, `IMPVAL`, `IMPQNT`, `QNTUNIT`.
- `decl` / `decl_label` – Declarant country code and label.
- `value` – Stored as VARCHAR to handle numbers, units, and flags (e.g., `:c` for confidential).
- Metadata timestamps (`update_data`, `timestamp_data`, etc.) for traceability.

Indicator definitions:
- `PRODVAL` – Production value (EUR)
- `PRODQNT` – Production quantity (units vary; see `QNTUNIT`)
- `EXPVAL`, `EXPQNT` – Export value/quantity (DS-059358)
- `IMPVAL`, `IMPQNT` – Import value/quantity (DS-059358)
- `QNTUNIT` – Unit label (KG, L, M3, etc.)
- Total production indicators – Reported in DS-059359; available fields mirror Eurostat’s total production outputs for the requested year.

### 2.3 Usage notes

- PRODCOM trade indicators act as a fallback only when COMEXT has zeros for a product-year combination.
- Confidentiality frequently suppresses `PRODQNT` at EU aggregates; the system logs empty responses but continues processing.
- When fetching DS-059359 for total production:
  ```julia
  fetch_prodcom_data("2017-2023", ["ds-059359"])  # Only total production dataset
  fetch_prodcom_data("2017-2023", ["ds-059358", "ds-059359"])  # Fetch both
  ```
- Fetching options:
  - Parallel per-year fetch is available via `parallel_years=true` and `max_parallel_years` (defaults to 2). A shared rate limiter (`rate_limit_seconds`, `rate_limit_jitter`) is applied across workers to avoid API bursts.
  - The shell wrapper `fetch_data.sh` exposes these as env vars (e.g., `PARALLEL_YEARS=true MAX_PARALLEL_YEARS=2 RATE_LIMIT_SECONDS=0.6`).
  - For a fast development snapshot, `fetch_test_data.sh "2022-2023" "heat_pumps,pv_panels"` writes to `CirQuant-database/raw/test.duckdb`; adjust `DB_PATH` to target another test database. Defaults use a slightly lower rate limit for quicker iterations.
  - Limit scope with `product_keys_filter` (e.g., `["heat_pumps","pv_panels"]`) when calling `fetch_prodcom_data` to keep test downloads small and focused.

## 3. COMEXT (Trade statistics)

### 3.1 Dataset

- **DS-059341** – International trade for EU and partner countries since 2002, disaggregated by HS2/HS4/HS6 products. CirQuant requests HS6 records matching the product mapping table, filtered by partner grouping and flow type.

### 3.2 Raw schema alignment

Rows are stored in `comext_ds_059341_YYYY`. Important columns (see `docs/database-schema-raw.md` for the full list):
- `product` – HS6 code without dots; `hs_code_query` retains the queried string.
- `flow` / `flow_code` – `1` for imports, `2` for exports (with `flow_label` text).
- `partner` / `partner_code` / `partner_label` – e.g., `INT_EU27_2020` (intra-EU) or `EXT_EU27_2020` (extra-EU).
- `indicators` – `VALUE_EUR` or `QUANTITY_KG`.
- `value` – Stored as VARCHAR because Eurostat may return scientific notation or placeholders.
- `fetch_date` – Timestamp when the call was executed.

### 3.3 Query strategy

To manage rate limits and file sizes:
1. **Partner split** – Separate calls for `INT_EU27_2020` and `EXT_EU27_2020`.
2. **Flow split** – Imports (`flow=1`) and exports (`flow=2`).
3. **Product filtering** – Only HS6 codes defined in `config/products.toml`.
4. **Rate limiting** – 0.5s delay after successful calls, 1s after failures.
5. **Error handling** – Failures are logged; fetch routines continue so a single outage does not halt the workflow.

COMEXT is treated as the authoritative source for trade indicators; PRODCOM fallback logic only replaces zero values to avoid double counting.

## 4. Complementary circular-economy data (planned)

The following datasets extend the analysis but have not yet been loaded into the raw DuckDB. When implemented, they will follow the same naming pattern (`<dataset>_<year>`).

### 4.0 Urban Mine Platform (UMP)

- **Content** – WEEE dataset distributed as an Excel package from https://www.urbanmineplatform.eu/download. All historical observations are normalized into `ump_weee_history` with columns for geography, year, category label, metric name, unit, and inferred product matches.
- **Battery placeholder** – A stub import is wired in for future UMP battery releases; no files are published yet.

### 4.1 Waste collection statistics

- **`env_waselee`** – WEEE data for electronic equipment.
- **`env_wasbat`** – Battery waste statistics.
- **Content** – Annual collection or recycling rates by product category and country.
- **Use** – Provides `current_circularity_rate` values grounded in official statistics, replacing placeholder assumptions in the configuration.

### 4.2 Waste treatment / recovery efficiency

- **`env_wastrt`** – Waste treatment operations by material.
- **Content** – Recovery rates for materials such as steel, aluminium, copper, plastics.
- **Use** – Supplies material-specific recycling efficiencies for calculating recovered tonnes/euros in the processed database.

### 4.3 Material composition datasets

- **Sources under review** – Ecodesign preparatory studies, Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) datasets, commercial LCA databases.
- **Content** – Product × material × mass share, potentially with year or technology differentiators.
- **Use** – Enables weighted material recovery calculations in PRQL transformations.

### 4.4 Derived weights and mass/count synthesis

- **Method** – Build `product_weights_YYYY` in the processed database by merging:
  - Config `weight_kg` per product (from `config/products.toml`)
  - PRODCOM counts (`QNTUNIT` = pieces) to derive total mass (`count × weight`)
  - COMEXT mass (`QUANTITY_KG`) to derive counts (`mass / weight`)
  - If both are present, keep both and mark the source as `combined`; otherwise `prodcom_counts_config_mass`, `comext_mass_config_counts`, or `config`.
- **Status** – Persisted in processed DuckDB after transformation; used to supply total mass or unit counts when one of the two is missing in raw sources.

## 5. Product scope and mappings

CirQuant currently focuses on:
- Heat pumps & refrigeration equipment
- Photovoltaic equipment
- ICT hardware (phones, computers, monitors, storage, aggregate ICT categories)
- Batteries (Li-ion and other chemistries)

Each product entry in `config/products.toml` lists PRODCOM and HS codes which feed the fetch routines. The mapping table constructed from this configuration ensures that PRODCOM (`prccode`) and HS (`product`) codes can be reconciled during transformation.

## 6. Fetching and processing strategy

### 6.1 Trade data priority
- **Primary** – COMEXT (`VALUE_EUR`, `QUANTITY_KG`) for imports/exports.
- **Fallback** – PRODCOM indicators only when COMEXT delivers `0` or missing values for the same product-year. Replacement happens during the harmonisation phase when building `production_trade_harmonized_YYYY` and `production_trade_YYYY`.

### 6.2 Performance safeguards
- **Rate limiting** – 0.5 s delay after success, 1 s after failure (both APIs).
- **Query batching** – PRODCOM: one call per indicator-year-product; COMEXT: one call per HS6-year-flow-partner set.
- **Error logging** – Failures are recorded; processing continues with partial data if necessary.
- **Fallback storage** – If DuckDB writes fail, CSV backups are generated so no fetch is lost.

### 6.3 Handling non-default datasets
Use the `custom_datasets` argument when calling `fetch_prodcom_data` to include DS-059359 or other PRODCOM datasets. This keeps the default workflow lightweight while still supporting targeted research.

## 7. Known issues and coverage gaps

1. **Confidentiality** – DS-059359 and certain PRODCOM indicators return empty results for EU aggregates or small countries. Expect gaps and rely on COMEXT/other sources when possible.
2. **Trade gaps** – Some HS codes lack trade entries in early years or for specific partner combinations. Logged as empty results; analysts may need to cross-check or adjust mapping codes.
3. **Unit heterogeneity** – `QNTUNIT` varies widely; downstream conversion scripts must handle litres, pieces, square metres, etc.
4. **Historical limits** – PRODCOM extends to 1995, but COMEXT starts in 2002, constraining the overlap period available for joint analyses.

## 8. Database storage recap

The raw DuckDB mirrors Eurostat responses (see `docs/database-schema-raw.md`). Table names and columns match those described above, ensuring:
- **Traceability** – metadata columns (`fetch_date`, timestamps, original codes) track every API call.
- **Consistency** – one table per dataset-year combination.
- **Extensibility** – future sources (waste statistics, material composition) will adopt the same naming convention so documentation remains valid.

Processed tables (e.g., `product_material_composition_YYYY`, `material_recycling_rates_YYYY`, `product_collection_rates_YYYY`, `product_weights_YYYY`, `product_unit_values_YYYY`, `circularity_indicators_by_strategy_YYYY`) build on these inputs and are described in `docs/database-schema-processed.md`.
